README for cobra java backend cross compiler devt.
--------------------------------------------------

Task: Make the cobra compiler generate Java code (a java back end).

Initially (now) this is a cross compiler. The .Net cobra compiler will
with the correct switch (-back-end:jvm) generate java source for the given
cobra source, compile it and run it.
  i.e A cobra to java compiler (compiler running) on .Net

Eventually when I have bootstrapped enough java codegeneration capability
and worked out a few issues I'll run the cross compiler on the 
(probably heavily modified) compiler source and build a java version of the 
compiler. Then we'll have a cobra to java compiler on the jvm.

Supporting that is this directory which provides 
    - stub code for a java cobra RTL (CobraLang.jar)
    - A tool to generate descriptions for java library classes (Pkgsig files)
    - a script to build and copy the various supporting pieces the java backend needs to the compiler Source directory.
    

The base java version supported is 1.6.
This one specifically
java version "1.6.0_24"
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.6.0_24-b07)
Java HotSpot(TM) Client VM (build 19.1-b02, mixed mode, sharing)
 
= Caveats =

This backend  is under development 
 - for any but the most trivial uses it is effectively broken.
 There are large amounts of (java) code generation missing.
 It spews debug/diagnostic/conversational/status info all the time.
 There are bugs.
 There are missing capabilities.  
 There are horrible bits 
 
Regardless, the .Net/Mono/C# compilation should continue to run as per the 
standard source distribution without problems.
Specifically all the tests should run.

This is a compiler mod only - there is no support for any sort of a
common/shared/portable system library. 

This is a source modification - no installation support. 
Run the compiler out of the cobra source directory

I'm developing this in Windows (XP) - it may or may not be working under mono 
on any other platform.

This is (the/an) initial devt snapshot. 
Its working(ish) but rough, 
Things will change

- What To Do -

 If you are brave or foolhardy enough to want to run this and see what 
 happens, good for you.
 This is what you will need to do

    1) Apply the patches providing the java backend to the Source tree
        - get the modified compiler subsequently rebuilt
        Patch should be on the cobra website http://cobra-language.com
        Ticket 275: More support for java backend
            http://cobra-language.com/trac/cobra/ticket/275
        
    2) Ensure java and javac executables (1.6) are in your PATH and work.
    
    3) Go into this dir and run ./mkJarAll 
        ( its a bash script - you will need bash or to port the script, 
            or run the command contents manually) - this builds the 
        tool and uses that to create the class description info and copies 
        it to the  right places in the  cobra source tree)
    4) find a test cobra script and compile it

- How to build and run a cobra program generating a java app -

    cobra -back-end:jvm -v:2 -verbosity-ref:1 -kif file.cobra

    -v:2 - display some compile run info
    -verbosity-ref:1   display (std) info about reading jarfiles
    -kif - leave the generated java files around after compilation
    file.cobra - the cobra source file to compile
    
If you are lucky you'dll get a whole lot of compiler output at the end of 
which you'll see a javac invocation followed by a successful execution 
of the translated cobra program.

If you are unlucky you'll see error lines from the javac compilation phase cos
the cobra program exercises something thats not implemented (java codegen wise).

If you are really unlucky something in the compiler will break and the
cobra compiler will barf some sort of exception.



- Status - 
 Jul-2011 - We can build and run simple (single file) programs. 
    (Up to about 032-* of the files in Tests/100-*. 
        Maybe more but thats what I've tried so far)
    We seem to be understanding references to java classes in library (jar) files. 

- Other -

Post issues/questions/comments/etc if you have them to Cobra Programming Language Forum
http://cobra-language.com/forums/viewforum.php
theres an existing topic 'Java Back End' or open new ones.



- hops

